the Secret Service has largely been the passive recipient of threatening communications to the President
Before the assassination the Secret Service infrequently requested other Federal law enforcement agencies to provide personnel
Daily supervision of the operations of the Secret Service within the Department of the Treasury should be improved.
The Commission emphasizes that it finds no causal connection between the assassination
The Secret Service in the past has sometimes guarded its right to be acknowledged as the sole protector of the Chief Executive.
Information is requested also concerning individuals or groups who have demonstrated an interest in the President
and should not be relied upon to the detriment of the imaginative application of judgment in special cases.
International Business Machines Corporation, and a panel of psychiatric and psychological experts.
The Commission urges that the Bureau of the Budget review these recommendations with the Secret Service and authorize a request for the necessary supplemental appropriation,
While these statistics relate to the activities of Secret Service agents stationed in field offices and not the White House detail,
The Secret Service and the Department of the Treasury now recognize this critical need.
has been augmented, and a Secret Service inspector has been put in charge of this operation. With the assistance of the President's Office of Science and Technology,
the caseload of each FBI agent averaged twenty to twenty-five, and he felt that this was high.
The suggestions of Federal agencies for revision of these guidelines were solicited.
Detailed formal agreements embodying these arrangements should be worked out between the Secret Service and both of these agencies.
Since the assassination of President Kennedy, the Secret Service has been experimenting with new techniques in the inspection of buildings along a motorcade route.
Since the assassination, both the Secret Service and the FBI have recognized
made certain recommendations which it believes would, if adopted,
and the Secret Service enter into a formal agreement defining such arrangements.
which would permit it to provide adequate protective manpower for all situations.
with the particular purposes of the agency involved. The Commission recognizes that this is a controversial area
Even with the advantage of hindsight, this letter does not appear to express or imply Oswald's, quote,
The Commission recommends that the present arrangements
The Chief of the Service now reports to the Secretary of the Treasury
in the locality to assure adequate manpower for this task, as it is now doing.
Protective Research participation in advance arrangements.
Protecting the President is a difficult and complex task which requires full use of the best resources of many parts of our Government.
Preventive Intelligence
the studies indicate that there is some utility in attempting to designate certain buildings as involving a higher risk than others.
and reports from other agencies which independently evaluate their information for potential sources of danger.
The Commission recognizes that no set of meaningful criteria will yield the names of all potential assassins. Charles J. Guiteau,
were all men who acted alone in their criminal acts against our leaders. None had a serious record of prior violence.
Each of them was a failure in his work and in his relations with others, a victim of delusions and fancies which led to the conviction
the Secret Service has been receiving full cooperation in scientific research and technological development
directed its field representatives to send a form request for intelligence information to all local,
whose prior acts or statements depict propensity for violence and hatred against organized government, end quote.
that is reflected in definite and comprehensive operating procedures.
As has been pointed out, the Commission has not resolved all the proposals which could be made. The Commission nevertheless is confident that,
The Commission shares this concern.
This matter is obviously beyond the jurisdiction of the Commission,
Manpower and Technical Assistance From Other Agencies
and the Department's Employment Policy Program, and who also represents the Secretary of the Treasury on various committees and groups.
General Supervision of the Secret Service
In his testimony Secretary of the Treasury C. Douglas Dillon informed the Commission
Recognition that the responsibility must be shared increases the likelihood that it will be met.
As a result of these studies, the planning document submitted by the Secretary of the Treasury to the Bureau of the Budget on August thirty-one,
Also the Department requests the sum of one hundred thousand dollars to conduct a detailed feasibility study;
and the traditions of the office in a democracy such as ours are so deep-seated as to preclude absolute security.
It has used other Treasury law enforcement agents on special experiments in building and route surveys in places to which the President frequently travels.
which represents a departure from its prior practice.
or, quote, other high government officials in the nature of a complaint coupled with an expressed or implied determination to use a means,
to make certain that all protective intelligence activities are coordinated.
or from which it derives assistance and support.
In the planning document currently under review by the Bureau of the Budget, the Department recommends that it be permitted to hire five qualified persons, quote,
This involves tight and unswerving discipline as well as the promotion of an outstanding degree of dedication and loyalty to duty.
in case of unexpected need; and twenty-five additional agents are recommended to provide the Vice President full protection.
(b) who have made threats of bodily harm against officials or employees of Federal, state or local government or officials of a foreign government,
the Commission notes with approval several recent measures taken and proposed by the Secret Service to improve its liaison arrangements.
and from a specialist in psychiatric prognostication at Walter Reed Hospital.
I ask you to look into this case and take the necessary steps to repair the damage done to me and my family. End quote.
and in taking preventive steps.
so that these arrangements can be made permanent without adversely affecting the operations of the Service's field offices.
This is especially necessary with regard to the FBI and CIA,
The Service should negotiate a memorandum of understanding with each agency that has been assisting it and from which it can expect to need help in the future.
between Secretary Dillon and Donald F. Hornig, Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, is a useful effort in the right direction.
Once the Secret Service has formulated its new standards for collection of information, it should enter into written agreements with each Federal agency
Its present manual filing system is obsolete;
and requests for additional personnel were not made because of the studies then being conducted.
the FBI, on sixteen separate occasions, supplied a total of one hundred thirty-nine agents to assist in protection work during a Presidential visit,
toward the preparation of formal understandings of the respective roles of the Secret Service and other agencies with which it collaborates
result in some degree of interference with the personal liberty of those involved.
nineteen sixty-four, makes several significant recommendations in this field.
The Commission was struck by the apparent lack of effort, on an interagency basis,
suggest that the Secret Service is trying to accomplish its job with too few people and without adequate modern equipment.
propensity toward violent action, or some similar characteristic, coupled with some evaluation of the capability of the individual or group
In planning its data processing techniques,
It has received assistance also from data processing experts at the CIA
through an Assistant Secretary whose duties also include the direct supervision of the Bureau of the Mint
he new instructions require FBI agents to report immediately information concerning, quote,
Liaison with other agencies regarding intelligence.
Secret Service Personnel and Facilities
and the Commission recommends that these and the other measures suggested by the Commission be pursued vigorously by Secret Service.
Thus, in the four months following the assassination,
and for reporting such events as a change in leadership or dogma which indicate that the group may present a danger to the President.
The incumbent has no technical qualifications in the area of Presidential protection.
Secretary Dillon testified that the use of such liaison officers is the only effective way to insure that adequate liaison is maintained.
Testimony and other evidence before the Commission
The Service should consider preparing formal explanations of the cooperation anticipated during a Presidential visit to a city,
Even if the manpower and technological resources of the Secret Service are adequately augmented,
Such agreements should describe in detail the information which is sought, the manner in which it will be provided to the Secret Service,
In view of the ever-increasing mobility of American Presidents, it seems unlikely that the Service could or should increase its own staff to a size
Since the assassination, the Service has experimented with the use of agents borrowed for short periods from such agencies.
can lead to lapses in protection, such as the confusion in Dallas about whether members of the public were permitted on overpasses.
even though it agrees with the Secret Service that it is preferable for the Service to have enough agents to handle all protective demands.
Both Director Hoover and Belmont expressed to the Commission the great concern of the FBI, which is shared by the Secret Service,
The problem is aggravated by the necessity that the Service obtain the assistance of local law enforcement officials in evaluating the information which it receives
and that many strongly held views are advanced in resistance to any suggestion that an effort be made to impose any degree of coordination.
Unless the Secret Service is able to deal rapidly and accurately with a growing body of data,
The Warren Commission Report.
The Commission strongly encourages these efforts to improve protection along a motorcade route.
A formal and thorough description of the responsibilities of the advance agent is now in preparation by the Service.
Since the assassination, the Service has recognized that these relationships must be far more formal
More importantly, the lack of carefully prepared and carefully transmitted instructions for typical visits to cities
Based on the Commission's investigation, the following minimum goals for improvements are indicated:
The Commission has, however, from its examination of the facts of President Kennedy's assassination
It has also used other Federal law enforcement agents during Presidential visits to cities in which such agents are stationed.
In evaluating data processing techniques of the Secret Service,
The Commission recommends that the agencies involved determine how much periodic assistance they can provide, and that each such agency
and who have been involved in bombing or bomb-making or whose past conduct indicates tendencies toward violence, and (d)
Thus, the local chief of police could be given a master plan, prepared for the occasion, of all protective measures to be taken during the visit;
While manuals and memoranda are no guarantee of effective operations,
with the active cooperation of the responsible agencies and with the understanding of the people of the United States in their demands upon their President,
The Commission also recommends
that the Secret Service consciously set about the task of inculcating and maintaining the highest standard of excellence and esprit, for all of its personnel.
Since the assassination, Secret Service procedures have been changed to require that a member of PRS accompany each advance survey team
but it seems to warrant further study before each agency becomes irrevocably committed to separate action.
Chief Rowley testified that the present workload of each Secret Service agent averages one hundred ten point one cases.
and the breach of regulations which occurred on the night of November twenty-one at Fort Worth.
FBI, and the Secret Service.
Under these criteria, whether the case should be referred to the Secret Service depends on the existence of a previous history of mental instability,
The Secret Service has embarked upon a complete overhaul of its research activities. The staff of the Protective Research Section (PRS)
that coordination might be achieved to a greater extent than seems now to be contemplated, without interference with the primary mission of each agency involved.
to further the intention to satisfy a grievance by unlawful means.
it has obtained the services of outside consultants, such as the Rand Corporation,
This report has already pointed out several respects
which was the possibility of an attempt against the person or safety of the President.
Such instructions will not fit all circumstances, of course,
other than legal or peaceful, to satisfy any grievance, real or imagined.
specifying criteria for information to be furnished to the Secret Service in addition to that covered by the former standard,
the interest of the Secret Service goes beyond information on individuals or groups threatening to cause harm or embarrassment to the President.
Leon F. Czolgosz,
In attempting to identify those individuals who might prove a danger to the President,
The Secret Service's liaison with the agencies that supply information to it has been too casual.
Although Chief Rowley does not complain about the pay scale for Secret Service agents,
The assistant to the Director of the FBI testified that
In addition, the Department of the Treasury has requested five additional agents for its Protective Research Section
in this crucial area of Presidential protection.
While these tentative criteria are a step in the right direction,
According to Secretary Dillon,
they seem unduly restrictive in continuing to require some manifestation of animus against a Government official.
By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. Chapter eight. The Protection of the President. Part five.
would take approximately twenty months to implement and require expenditures of approximately three million dollars during that period.
It may eventually be desirable to codify the practice in an Executive order.
The intimacy of the Secret Service's relationship to the White House
I shall employ all means to right this gross mistake or injustice to a bona fide U.S. citizen and ex-service man.
On December twenty-six, nineteen sixty-three, the FBI circulated additional instructions to all its agents,
that society and its leaders had combined to thwart him. It will require every available resource of our Government
and investigative capabilities of the agencies now operating in this field but will continue
this money would be used to compensate consultants, to lease standard equipment or to purchase specially designed pilot equipment.
particularly those arising from organized groups, within their special jurisdiction.
from many Government agencies including the Department of Defense and the President's Office of Science and Technology.
The Commission further recommends that the Secret Service coordinate its planning as closely as possible with all of the Federal agencies from which it receives information.
According to Secretary Dillon,
Nevertheless, such a breach, in which so many agents participated,
the assistance of trained Federal law enforcement officers.
materially improve upon the procedures in effect at the time of President Kennedy's assassination and result in a substantial lessening of the danger.
has hitherto been handled on an informal basis.
to be able to provide effective continuing supervision
John Schrank, and Guiseppe Zangara -- four assassins or would-be assassins
Inspection of Buildings
The new tentative criteria are useful in making clear that
The Commission believes that the recommended Cabinet-level committee will help to correct many of the major deficiencies of supervision
the Secret Service sought funds for twenty-five new positions, primarily in field offices. This increase has been approved by the Congress.
its inability to process large amounts of data, and its failure to provide specific descriptions of the kind of information it sought.
For more information, or to volunteer, please visit librivox dot org. Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Liaison With Local Law Enforcement Agencies
these figures suggest that the agents of the Secret Service are substantially overworked.
and the dissimilarity of its protective functions to most activities of the Department of the Treasury
The demands on the President in the execution of His responsibilities in today's world are so varied and complex
According to Chief Rowley, by mid-June nineteen sixty-four,
Work is going forward
This special assistant should be required to have sufficient stature and experience in law enforcement, intelligence, or allied fields
to plan and develop a workable and efficient automated file and retrieval system, end quote.
that an interagency committee has been established to develop more effective criteria.
From February eleven through June thirty, nineteen sixty-four,
This Commission can recommend no procedures for the future protection of our Presidents which will guarantee security.
However, the nineteen sixty-four to sixty-five budget request was submitted in November nineteen sixty-three
In June nineteen sixty-four, the Secret Service sent to a number of Federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies
the Secret Service should attempt to develop a system compatible with those of the agencies from which most of its data will come. Note:
This was the consequence of the Service's lack of an adequate investigative staff,
and the leading State and local agencies that might be a source of such information.
The Commission endorses these efforts to supplement the Service's own personnel by obtaining, for short periods of time,
because of Oswald's demonstrated hostility toward the Secretary of the Navy in his letter of January thirty, nineteen sixty-two. Quote,
The Commission regards this as a most useful innovation and urges that the practice be continued.
The Secret Service has now presented its recommendations to the Bureau of the Budget. The plan proposed by the Service
Much of the Secret Service work requires the development and use of highly sophisticated equipment,
eighteen agents are proposed for a rotating pool which will go through an intensive training cycle and also be available to supplement the White House detail
Once experience has been gained in implementing such agreements with the Federal and leading State and local agencies,
The exchange of letters dated August thirty-one, nineteen sixty-four,
the Secret Service had received from the FBI some nine thousand reports on members of the Communist Party.
In its budget request for the fiscal year beginning July one, nineteen sixty-four,
It should be made clear that the Secret Service will in no way seek to duplicate the intelligence
The FBI has indicated that it is willing to continue to make such assistance available,
salaries are below those of the FBI and leading municipal police forces.
The Commission urges that the Service continue this effort to overhaul and define its procedures.
The plan provides for an additional two hundred five agents for the Secret Service. Seventeen of this number are proposed for the Protective Research Section;
the amount of assistance that it can expect from other agencies.
to devise a practical system which has any reasonable possibility of revealing such malcontents.
Automatic data processing
disclosed by the Commission's investigation. Other measures should be taken as well to improve the overall operation of the Secret Service.
and this source should not be neglected by undue concentration on relationships with other Federal agencies.
The FBI now transmits information on all defectors, a category which would, of course, have included Oswald.
and be available to protect the President or Vice President when they travel;
to use the data developed by these agencies to carry out its special duties.
to assist in its protection functions.
more than five thousand names were referred to the Secret Service in the first four months of nineteen sixty-four.
On the basis of such a feasibility study,
The Commission, therefore, recommends that the President consider ordering an inquiry into the possibility
As a beginning step to improve liaison with local law enforcement officials, the Secret Service on August twenty-six, nineteen sixty-four,
The U.S. government has no charges or complaints against me.
The occasional use of personnel from other Federal agencies to assist in protecting the President has a further advantage. It symbolizes the reality
the Secret Service, through its field offices,
Alan H. Belmont, Assistant to the Director of the FBI, testified that this revision was initiated by the FBI itself.
it will continue to rely in many respects upon the greater resources of the Office of Science and Technology and other agencies.
the Committee will include representatives of the President's Office of Science and Technology, Department of Defense, CIA,
as soon as it can be justified. The Congress has often stressed that it will support any reasonable request for funds for the protection of the President.
It is apparent that a good deal of further consideration and experimentation will be required before adequate criteria can be framed.
Finally, these agreements with Federal and local authorities will be of little value
The essential terms of such memoranda might well be embodied in an Executive order.
The Secret Service will be better able to plan its own long-range personnel requirements if it knows with reasonable certainty
the Department hopes to design a practical system which will fully meet the needs of the Protective Research Section of the Secret Service.
county, and State law enforcement agencies in their districts.
PRS must develop the capacity to classify its subjects on a more sophisticated basis than the present geographic breakdown.
should negotiate similar arrangements with such other State and local law enforcement agencies as may provide meaningful assistance.
they should be responsible for advising the Secret Service if information develops indicating the existence of an assassination plot
and the respective responsibilities for any further investigation that may be required.
no sizable organization can achieve efficiency without the careful analysis and demarcation of responsibility
guidelines for an experimental program to develop more detailed criteria.
However, the instructions must be communicated to the local police in any event and can be leaked to the press whether or not they are in writing.
Chief Rowley explained that this would not provide enough additional manpower to take all the measures which he considers required.
the Service had the advantage of nine thousand, five hundred hours of work by other enforcement agencies.
the increased information supplied by other agencies will be wasted.
Broader and more selective criteria
in formats that can be communicated to each level of local authorities.
to establish liaison with local intelligence gathering agencies and to provide for the immediate evaluation of information received from them.
is not consistent with the standards which the responsibilities of the Secret Service require it to meet.
that the PRS files can no longer be limited largely to persons communicating actual threats to the President.
The Secret Service should not and does not plan to develop its own intelligence gathering facilities to duplicate the existing facilities of other Federal agencies.
field agents supplement those on the detail, particularly when the President is traveling.
and each agency given clear understanding of the assistance which the Secret Service expects.
that referrals to the Secret Service under the new criteria might, if not properly handled,
(c) who express or have expressed strong or violent anti-U.S. sentiments
that written instructions might come into the hands of local newspapers, to the prejudice of the precautions described.
The Secret Service should utilize the personnel of other Federal law enforcement offices
unless a system is established for the frequent formal review of activities thereunder. In this regard
Subversives, ultrarightists, racists and fascists (a) possessing emotional instability or irrational behavior,
They emphasized the necessity that the information now being furnished be handled with judgment and care.
to serve as liaison officers with law enforcement and intelligence agencies. On the basis of the Department's review during the past several months,
the Commission had occasion to become informed, to a limited extent, about the data processing techniques of other Federal intelligence and law enforcement agencies.
The Commission recommends that the Secretary of the Treasury appoint a special assistant with the responsibility of supervising the Service.
with the Office of Science and Technology and the other Federal agencies that have been so helpful to the Secret Service be placed on a permanent and formal basis.
Based on its experience during this period, the Secret Service now recommends that additional personnel be made available to PRS
Since these agencies are already obliged constantly to evaluate the activities of such groups,
This PRS agent will also be responsible for establishing an informal local liaison committee
Advice by the Secret Service to local police in metropolitan areas relating to the assistance expected in connection with a Presidential visit
This no longer appears to be the case.
one hundred forty-five are proposed for the field offices to handle the increased volume of security investigations
and of the Advanced Research Projects Agency of the Department of Defense,
each patrolman might be given a prepared booklet of instructions explaining what is expected of him. The Secret Service has expressed concern
Much useful information will come to the attention of local law enforcement agencies in the regular course of their activities,
in which the Commission believes that the Secret Service has operated with insufficient planning or control.
some of which must be specially designed to fit unique requirements. Even before the assassination, and to a far greater extent thereafter,
The volume of references to the Secret Service has increased substantially since the new instructions went into effect;
Although the Commission does not know whether the cases involved are entirely comparable,
the recommendations we have here suggested would greatly advance the security of the office without any impairment of our fundamental liberties.
and to keep the Secretary fully informed regarding all significant developments relating to Presidential protection.
which carry the major responsibility for supplying information about potential threats,
The Commission recommends that prompt and favorable consideration be given to this request.
Chief Rowley believed that they would,
Each of these efforts appears sound,
that the job of protecting the President has not been and cannot be exclusively the responsibility of the Secret Service.
have made it difficult for the Treasury to maintain close and continuing supervision.
it makes no use of the recent developments in automatic data processing which are widely used in the business world and in other Government offices.
Actions by the Service since the assassination indicate its awareness of the necessity for substantial improvement in its administration.
It is questionable whether such criteria would have resulted in the referral of Oswald to the Secret Service.
Lack of adequate resources is an unacceptable excuse for failing to improve advance precautions
to develop coordinated and mutually compatible systems, even where such coordination would not seem inconsistent
determination to use a means, other than legal or peaceful, to satisfy his grievance, end quote, within the meaning of the new criteria.